Add CITEseq postprocessing to QC report (#343)
AlexsLemonade/scpca-nf: templates/qc_report/cite_qc.rmd

  kableExtra::column_spec(2, monospace = TRUE)
```

## ADT Statistics
```{r}
antibody_tags <- as.data.frame(rowData(adt_exp)) |>
  tibble::rownames_to_column("Antibody") |>
  arrange(desc(mean)) |>
  select("Antibody",
         "Mean UMI count per cell" = mean,
         "Percent of cells detected" = detected,
         "ADT target type" =  target_type)

knitr::kable(antibody_tags, digits = 2) |>
  kableExtra::kable_styling(bootstrap_options = c("striped", "condensed"),
                            full_width = FALSE,
                            position = "left",
                            ) 
```

## ADT Post-processing Statistics

```{r}

> filtered_cell_count <- sum(filtered_sce$adt_scpca_filter == "Remove")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
filtered_cell_count <- sum(filtered_sce$adt_scpca_filter == "Keep")
```
I think I would capture the keep cells, see my comment below.

basic_statistics <- tibble::tibble(
    "Method used to identify cells targeted for filtering" = format(processed_meta$adt_scpca_filter_method),

>     "Number of cells targeted for filtering"  = format(filtered_cell_count),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    "Number of cells that pass filtering thresholds"  = format(filtered_cell_count),
```
I think we probably want to be consistent with how we report in the RNA section, which is the cells that are present after filtering. Also the targeted wording was confusing to me.

Author: I ended up using that wording all around because we don't actually _perform_ filtering, just identify cells to filter. On one hand I agree about consistency, but on the other hand we aren't actually doing the same thing here! Either way I've accepted suggestions and will fiddle with other wording to be more clear.

>     "Percent of cells targeted for filtering" =

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    "Percent of cells that pass filtering thresholds" =
```

      paste0(round(filtered_cell_count/nrow(processed_sce) * 100, digits = 2), "%")
  ) |>
  mutate(across(.fns = ~ifelse(.x == "NULL", "N/A", .x))) |> # reformat nulls
  t()

knitr::kable(basic_statistics, align = 'r') |>
  kableExtra::kable_styling(bootstrap_options = "striped",
                            full_width = FALSE,
                            position = "left") |>
  kableExtra::column_spec(2, monospace = TRUE)
```

> ## Expression of highly variable ADTs

Reviewer: Before you get to this I think we need a plot showing the filtering that is suggested. We could include another plot like the keep/remove colored plot in RNA but color cells by RNA filter, ADT filter, all filter, or keep.

> The plots below show UMAP embeddings calculated from RNA expression where each cell is colored by the expression level of the labeled 

Reviewer: Alternatively (or additionally?) we could show a faceted ridge plot with the top variable ADT tags on the X axis and the Y axis is the normalized expression.

             stringr::str_starts(filter_summary, "Keep"), 
             "Keep", 
             "Remove"
           )) |>
    select(-n)

  if (sum(stringr::str_detect(filtered_coldata_df$filter_summary, "Error")) != 0) {
    stop("Processing error when evaluating CITE-seq filtering.")
  }

  
  ggplot(filtered_coldata_df, aes(x = detected, y = subsets_mito_percent, color = keep_column)) +
    geom_point(alpha = 0.5, size = 1) +
    geom_vline(xintercept = min_gene_cutoff, linetype = "dashed") +
    labs(x = "Number of genes detected",
         y = "Mitochondrial percentage",
         title = "Combined RNA and ADT filters") +
    facet_wrap(vars(filter_summary)) +
    theme(plot.title = element_text(hjust = 0.5), 
          legend.position = "none")
}
```

## Expression of highly variable ADTs

The plots in this section visualize the top four most variable ADTS in the library.

The plot below displays normalized expression of these four ADTs, with one ADT shown per panel.

```{r}
# Calculate ADT variance
if (has_processed) {
  
  top_n <- 4 # we want the top 4 ADTs

  # Calculate variance for each ADT
  adt_var <- altExp(processed_sce) |>
    logcounts() |>

>     as.matrix() |> 

Reviewer 2: Not sure this is needed: `apply` functions should work fine on `Matrix` objects too. But I could be wrong,

    apply(1, var, na.rm=TRUE) 
  
  # Get the top 4
  top_adts <- adt_var[ order(adt_var, decreasing=TRUE)[1:top_n] ] |>

>     names()

Reviewer 2: Annoying that `order` doesn't preserve the names!

Author: rude indeed!!! will re-look at this..

Author: Seems ok to me actually, see example - 

```
> vec <- c("A" = 1.5, "B" = 2.5, "C" = 0.5, D = "10")
> vec[ order(vec, decreasing=TRUE)[1:2] ]
    B     D 
"2.5"  "10" 
> vec[ order(vec, decreasing=TRUE)[1:2] ] |> names()
[1] "B" "D"
```

Reviewer 2: No, it is fine! I was thinking of doing things in a different way with `vec |> order() |> head() |> names()` to save some nesting, but you can't do that because `order()` drops the names.

Author: gotcha :)

} else {
  # This warning also handles "else" conditions for the next two chunks
  glue::glue("
    <div class=\"alert alert-warning\">

    No ADT post-processing was performed on this library.

    </div>
  ")
}
```

> The plot below displays UMAP embeddings calculated from RNA expression, where each cell is colored by the expression level of the given ADT. 

Reviewer: Should this be below the next chunk? I think you want it right before the UMAP is actually plotted?

Author: yes good catch, thanks!

```{r fig.alt="UMAP colored by expression of highly variable ADTs", warning = FALSE}
if (has_processed) {

  # grab expression for top ADTs from counts
  var_adt_exp_df <- logcounts(altExp(processed_sce))[top_adts,] |>

>     as.matrix() |>
>     t() |>

Reviewer 2: Likely a bit more efficient to swap the order here and let the `Matrix` package work its magic.
```suggestion
    t() |>
    as.matrix() |>
```

    # combine all ADTs into a single column for  faceting 
    tidyr::pivot_longer(!barcode,
                        names_to = "ADT",
                        values_to = "adt_expression")
  
  # expression density plots
  ggplot(var_adt_exp_df, aes(x = adt_expression, fill = ADT)) + 
    geom_density() + 
    facet_wrap(vars(ADT), nrow = 2) +
    labs(x = "Log-normalized ADT expression") +
    theme(legend.position = "none") 
} 
```

```{r fig.alt="UMAP colored by expression of highly variable ADTs"}
if (has_processed) {
  # create data frame of UMAPs and expression 
   umap_df <- scuttle::makePerCellDF(processed_sce) |>
      tibble::rownames_to_column("barcode") |>
      select(barcode, 
             UMAP1 = UMAP.1, 
             UMAP2 = UMAP.2) |> 
    # combine with gene expression
    left_join(var_adt_exp_df, by = "barcode")
  
  ggplot(umap_df, aes(x = UMAP1, y = UMAP2, color = adt_expression)) + 
    geom_point(alpha = 0.1, size = 0.1) + 
    facet_wrap(vars(ADT)) +
    scale_color_viridis_c() +
    labs(
      color = "Log-normalized ADT expression"
    ) +
    # remove axis numbers and background grid
    scale_x_continuous(labels = NULL, breaks = NULL) + 

>     scale_y_continuous(labels = NULL, breaks = NULL) + 

Reviewer 2: Did you try adding in `coord_fixed()`? I'm thinking we want to add that to all UMAP plots to make them plot with the same aspect ratio.

Author: thanks for the reminder here!

  
  basic_statistics <- tibble::tibble(
    # Note that the adt_scpca_filter_method column is only present in the processed_sce object
    "Method used to identify cells to filter" = format(processed_meta$adt_scpca_filter_method),
    "Number of cells that pass filtering threshold"  = format(filtered_cell_count),
    "Percent of cells that pass filtering threshold" =
        paste0(round(filtered_cell_count/nrow(processed_sce) * 100, digits = 2), "%")
    ) |>
    mutate(across(.fns = ~ifelse(.x == "NULL", "N/A", .x))) |> # reformat nulls
    t()
  
  knitr::kable(basic_statistics, align = 'r') |>
    kableExtra::kable_styling(bootstrap_options = "striped",
                              full_width = FALSE,
                              position = "left") |>
    kableExtra::column_spec(2, monospace = TRUE)
} else {
    glue::glue("
    <div class=\"alert alert-warning\">

    No ADT post-processing was performed on this library.

    </div>
  ")
}

```

## Removing low quality cells based on ADT counts

```{r results='asis'}

glue::glue("
  This glue is OUTSIDE the if and it prints just fine. 
  Where are my glues INSIDE the ifs? :( 

>   ")

Author: done in https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/scpca-nf/pull/343/commits/f51e0466dd4355fc942b2e80272b70c9c5503348

      scpca_filter == "Remove" & adt_scpca_filter == "Remove" ~ filter_levels[2],
      scpca_filter == "Remove" & adt_scpca_filter == "Keep"   ~ filter_levels[3],
      scpca_filter == "Keep"   & adt_scpca_filter == "Remove" ~ filter_levels[4],
      TRUE ~ "Error"
    ))  |>
    # now, add a count to each label and factor in count order
    add_count(filter_summary) |>
    mutate(filter_summary = glue::glue("{filter_summary}\nN={n}"), 
           filter_summary = forcats::fct_infreq(filter_summary)) |>
    select(-n)

  if (sum(stringr::str_detect(filtered_coldata_df$filter_summary, "Error")) != 0) {
    stop("Processing error when evaluating CITE-seq filtering.")
  }

  
  ggplot(filtered_coldata_df, aes(x = detected, y = subsets_mito_percent, color = filter_summary)) +
    geom_point(alpha = 0.5, size = 1) +
    geom_vline(xintercept = min_gene_cutoff, linetype = "dashed") +
    labs(x = "Number of genes detected",
         y = "Mitochondrial percentage",
         title = "Combined RNA and ADT filters") +
    scale_color_viridis_d(direction = -1) +
    facet_wrap(vars(filter_summary)) +
    theme(plot.title = element_text(hjust = 0.5),

>           legend.position = "none")

Author: Yep, got this all into a `theme_set()` on my end already when I was making plotting changes during your review!

}
```

## Expression of highly variable ADTs

The plots below show visualizations of the top 4 most variable ADTS in the library.

First, ridgeplots showing normalized expression of these 4 ADTs are shown.
Second, UMAP embeddings calculated from RNA expression are shown, where each cell is colored by the expression level of the given ADT. 

```{r fig.height=10, fig.width=8, message=FALSE, warning=FALSE, results='asis'}
if (has_processed) {
  
  # only create plot if variable ADTs are present

>   if (!is.null(processed_meta$highly_variable_adts)) {

Reviewer: For non-CITE-seq samples, the backup is to log transform the counts if something fails with the default normalization method. On the one hand, I like the idea of mirroring that and including log-transformed counts for CITE-seq. On the other hand, I am wary of providing what may appear like normalized counts to users and them using those without re-doing normalization. I think ultimately I'm in favor of adding it to the object rather than failing normalization, but we definitely need to make sure documentation is up to date.

>   if (!is.null(processed_meta$highly_variable_adts)) {

Author: >  I think ultimately I'm in favor of adding it to the object rather than failing normalization, but we definitely need to make sure documentation is up to date.

👍

>   if (!is.null(processed_meta$highly_variable_adts)) {

Author: Hm, I think we might also want another metadata variable here to match RNA.... `adt_normalization = <median-based/log-normalization>`

>   if (!is.null(processed_meta$highly_variable_adts)) {

Reviewer: > Hm, I think we might also want another metadata variable here to match RNA.... `adt_normalization = <median-based/log-normalization>`

I agree with this.

>   if (!is.null(processed_meta$highly_variable_adts)) {

Author: done in https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/scpca-nf/pull/343/commits/c566fdd62711087930028ca0e45c24fe01e33182
I directly used `log1p` here, and added the metadata string.

    
    adt_exp_processed <- altExp(processed_sce)
    
    # select top ADTs to plot 
    top_adts <- processed_meta$highly_variable_adts |>
      head(n = 4)
    
    # grab expression for top ADTs from counts
    var_adt_exp_df <- logcounts(adt_exp_processed[top_adts,]) |>
      as.matrix() |>
      t() |>
      as.data.frame() |>
      tibble::rownames_to_column("barcode") |>
      # combine all ADTs into a single column for easy faceting 

>       tidyr::pivot_longer(cols = starts_with("CD"),

Author: > not make an assumption about ADT names?

:+1:

>       tidyr::pivot_longer(cols = starts_with("CD"),

Author: done in https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/scpca-nf/pull/343/commits/f51e0466dd4355fc942b2e80272b70c9c5503348

                            names_to = "ADT",
                            values_to = "adt_expression")
    
    # First, expression ridgeplot ridgeplots

>     adt_ridgeplot <- ggplot(var_adt_exp_df, 

Author: done in https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/scpca-nf/pull/343/commits/f51e0466dd4355fc942b2e80272b70c9c5503348

           aes(y = ADT, x = adt_expression, fill = ADT)) + 
      ggridges::geom_density_ridges(alpha = 0.5) + 

>       scale_fill_viridis_d() + 

Author: Yes, I also thought of this while you were reviewing and I was making plot changes! I ended up changing to use a 2 color scheme for the faceted keep/remove plot to _match_ the keep/remove colors in the earlier cell filtering plot that is in the main QC report. For this plot, I ended up just using default ggplot fills (since empty density plots look weird to me).

      labs(x = "Log-normalized ADT expression") +
      theme(legend.position = "none") 
    
    
    # Next, extract umap embeddings as a dataframe
    umap_df <- reducedDim(processed_sce, "UMAP") |>
      as.data.frame() |>
      tibble::rownames_to_column("barcode") |>
      rename("UMAP1" = "V1",
             "UMAP2" = "V2") 
    
    # combine ADT expression with coldata, umap embeddings, and create data frame to use for plotting
    coldata_df <- colData(processed_sce) |>
      as.data.frame() |>
      tibble::rownames_to_column("barcode") |>
      # combine with gene expression
      left_join(var_adt_exp_df, by = "barcode") |>
      # combine with umap embeddings 

>       left_join(umap_df, by = "barcode")

Author: 👀

    
    
    adt_umap <- ggplot(coldata_df, aes(x = UMAP1, y = UMAP2, color = adt_expression)) + 
      geom_point(alpha = 0.1, size = 0.1) + 
      facet_wrap(vars(ADT)) +
      scale_color_viridis_c() +
      labs(
        color = "Log-normalized ADT expression"
      ) +

>       theme(legend.position = "bottom", 

Author: > Also, let's maybe remove numbers from the UMAP?

I can do that all around!

>       theme(legend.position = "bottom", 

Author: done in https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/scpca-nf/pull/343/commits/fac803cda9c5519a70f3cb60449cdd623948ba6f & https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/scpca-nf/pull/343/commits/f51e0466dd4355fc942b2e80272b70c9c5503348

            axis.text = element_text(size = 8, color = "black"),
            axis.title = element_text(size = 8, color = "black"),
            strip.text = element_text(size = 8),
            strip.background = element_rect(fill = 'transparent'),
            legend.title = element_text(size = 8),
            legend.text = element_text(size = 8)) + 
      guides(colour = guide_colorbar(title.position = "bottom", title.hjust = 0.5)) 
    
    # Combine with patchwork so that both plots are reliably printed

>     adt_ridgeplot / adt_umap

Author: No need, can easily separate and that will make for clearer alt text to add in as well.

>     adt_ridgeplot / adt_umap

Author: done in https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/scpca-nf/pull/343/commits/f51e0466dd4355fc942b2e80272b70c9c5503348
